Even before I had ever uttered the term "data scientist," a career
involving "science" and "data" struck me as a natural choice based on
my interests and proclivities.  Indeed, for all of my nearly 20 year
career, and long before the term reached the popular lexicon, I have
done data science.  However, up to the present, my technical skills
have found very specialized applications in narrow academic
disciplines.  I now seek to broaden my skills, and the range of
problems I can tackle, so I can work for employers beyond academia
solving challenging problems.

Since 2003, when I earned a Ph.D. in Applied Mathematics from Cornell
University, I have been employed in data-intensive scientific fields.
Soon after graduation from Cornell, I started working as a researcher
at the University of Maryland, studying human balance control.  I
later moved back and forth between Johns Hopkins University and Yale
University researching motor control and neuroscience.  Finally, in
2013, I started teaching mathematics and statistics at American
University.

Despite giving me an introduction to data, my early training prepared
me to study models, not data.  A model is a mathematical description
of what to expect from data.  Models codify assumptions about physical
systems.  Cornell trained me to study and understand the implications
of such modeling assumptions and I turned this training into a
successful academic career.

Although, my Ph.D. dissertation contained visualizations and analyses
of real-world data from a human locomotion lab, the analyses of these
data remained much simpler, from the perspective of data science, than
the analyses of the accompanying locomotion model.  Soon after I left
Cornell, I identified a desire to advance my career by getting my
hands dirty with more sophisticated analyses of such real world
data---while still staying true to my training in modeling.  So I
started studying statistical methods for fitting models to data.
These methods allow a principled construction of models using data
from the physical system, rather using just guesses when first
principles do not apply.

To try to understand the statistical methods better, my first
model-fitting projects involved simulated data---in other words, data
from known and well understood models of physical systems---not data
from the physical systems themselves.  One might say that I could not
escape from my training: I still studied models, keeping my hands
clean from real-world data.  Nevertheless, my results confirmed the
value of this approach.

I and others at the University of Maryland wanted to develop a
diagnostic tool for understanding what part(s) of the postural control
system failed for each subject when they suffered from repeated falls.
We expected that such a tool would help treat fall-prone
patients---common, for different reasons, among elderly populations.
A patient with sensory deficits should be treated differently than a
patient with motor deficits, and both should be treated differently
from a patient with central deficits---of which many exist.  We
planned a simple perturbation approach, with model-fitting analyses of
data from each patient's postural sway, to understand precisely what
part of the system failed and why.

To our surprise, my modeling approach saved the lab a lot of time and
money by showing that under very general conditions, a so-called
pole-zero cancellation would thwart our diagnostic ambitions, even in
the easiest to examine patient: a mathematical model patient.  I
analyzed and understood the mathematical conditions that doomed our
proposed diagnostic tool, and showed that techniques more invasive
than ethically possible would be needed to rectify the situation.  I
published this negative result in 2009, still with hands clean of
real-world data from fall-prone subjects.  Fortunately, I had already
moved to an animal lab, where such experiments were possible, but
keeping to my wheelhouse, all four of my papers that came from that
lab remained similarly theoretical, involving different ways of
understanding models of animal motor control.

Sometime later, in 2013, I began teaching mathematics and statistics
at American University.  While at AU, my department started a data
science degree program and I participated in its formation.  In the
process, I learned a lot about the field.  Indeed, I first became
aware of the term "data science."  With my colleagues, I discussed
about what employers would want from our graduates.  I explored
Kaggle, and started reading job postings. The whole experience left me
intrigued and drawn to this exciting profession.  I became aware of
the revolutionary consequences of the drop in the price of archiving
data and amazed by the enormous volume of data cheaply or freely
available to the public.  I purchased a library of data science books,
and started taking on projects to develop my skills.

I sought out a colleague, Misha Ahrens, who does big data research in
neuroscience.  With data he gave me, I performed a surprising
calculation of the intrinsic dimension from calcium imaging of the
neural activity in the whole brain of a larval zebrafish performing a
virtual sensorimotor stabilization task.  At AU, I taught an R-based
Introduction to Statistical Computation and Modeling class.  As a
result, I took on new research interests---the topics that showed
particular popularity among my students' class projects---specifically
baseball and Twitter.  I published one baseball paper on my own and I
am currently preparing another baseball manuscript (with AU
undergraduate Jake Berberian).  Additionally, I have planned a
collaboration with a colleague (AU Professorial Lecturer Jacob Ward)
analyzing tweets from Twitter.

Since setting an intention to develop broader data science skills, I
have brainstormed many ideas for projects.  These ideas have made me
realize just how much data science skills open up opportunities.  One
class of projects has particular appeal to me and strongly motivates
me to excellence.  I would like to discover and communicate insights
from publicly available data that foster hope, courage, love,
compassion, forgiveness, and positive engagement in human society.  I
am not specifically looking for this opportunity in a job, because the
constraint of needing to find funding for such a project might be
limiting to its goals---and I am perfectly happy to do data science
projects outside of my formal employment, even if I envision it for
"someday" in the future.  That said, these personal ambitions may
guide the choices in my career.  For example, because I believe that
many of the insights most helpful to human civilization will come from
textual data, I seek training and work opportunities that will develop
my skills in natural language processing, data wrangling, and machine
learning relevant to deriving insights from data.

In January 2019, when I heard about a fellowship for a data science
boot camp at The Flatiron School in DC, I realized that the time had
come to make my move to a more traditional data science career.  After
the fellowship, I want a data science job that will allow me to fully
engage creatively in challenging problems, and provide a fulfilling
and supportive environment for success, stimulate my personal growth,
and give me the opportunity to learn and progress in my career.  I am
in the process of figuring out what type of workplace will best meet
these objectives, but one answer that currently seems attractive to me
is working for a company does data science for a wide range of
clients.

I don't know what I will write about data science a year from now, or
what projects I will pursue, but I am very excited about the journey
that continues.

